[DOC] Update Tempo doc to Alloy (#3843)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/configuration/grafana-alloy/automatic-logging.md

---
title: 'Automatic logging: Trace discovery through logs'
description: Automatic logging provides an easy and fast way of getting trace discovery through logs.
menuTitle: Automatic logging
weight: 200
aliases:
- /docs/tempo/grafana-alloy/automatic-logging
---

# Automatic logging: Trace discovery through logs

Running instrumented distributed systems is a very powerful way to gain
understanding over a system, but it brings its own challenges. One of them is
discovering which traces exist.

Using the span logs connector, you can use Alloy to perform automatic logging.

In the beginning of Tempo, querying for a trace was only possible if you knew
the ID of the trace you were looking for. One solution was automatic logging.
Automatic logging provides an easy and fast way of discovering trace IDs
through log messages.
Well-formatted log lines are written to a logs exporter
for each span, root, or process that passes through the tracing
pipeline. This allows for automatically building a mechanism for trace discovery.
On top of that, you can also get metrics from traces using a logs source, and
allow quickly jumping from a log message to the trace view in Grafana.

> While this approach is useful, it isn't as powerful as [TraceQL]({{< relref
> "../../traceql" >}}). If you are here because you know you want to log the
> trace ID, to enable jumping from logs to traces, then read on.
> 
> If you want to query the system directly, read the [TraceQL
> documentation]({{< relref "../../traceql" >}}).

Author: ```suggestion
While this approach is useful, it isn't as powerful as TraceQL. 
If you are here because you know you want to log the
trace ID, to enable jumping from logs to traces, then read on.

If you want to query the system directly, read the [TraceQL
documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/traceql).
```

and is a good way to get started using automatic logging:

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "default" {
  grpc {}
  http {}

  output {
    traces = [otelcol.connector.spanlogs.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.connector.spanlogs "default" {
  roots = true

  output {
    logs = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.otlp "default" {
  client {
    endpoint = env("OTLP_ENDPOINT")
  }
}
```

This example logs all trace roots, adding the `http.method` and `http.target` attributes to the log line,
then pushes logs to a local Loki instance:

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "default" {
  grpc {}
  http {}

  output {
    traces = [otelcol.connector.spanlogs.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.connector.spanlogs "default" {
  roots           = true
  span_attributes = ["http.method", "http.target"]

  output {
    logs = [otelcol.exporter.loki.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.loki "default" {
  forward_to = [loki.write.local.receiver]
}

loki.write "local" {
  endpoint {
    url = "loki:3100"
  }
}
```

## Examples

<p align="center"><img src="../automatic-logging-example-query.png" alt="Automatic logging overview"></p>

> <p align="center"><img src="../automatic-logging-example-results.png" alt="Automatic logging overview"></p>

Reviewer: Why are these in `/assets/` instead of in the media repo: https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/image-guidelines/#where-to-store-media-assets

Also why wrapped in `<p>` instead of using https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/shortcodes/#figure or regular markdown?

Same question applies to all other instances of images in this PR.

Author: Legacy reasons, mostly. Trying to get things done and not having enough time to address everything that needs to be tackled. 

The images are in assets because they haven't been uploaded and converted. Most likely these images will have to be replaced in the near future because of Grafana UI changes.

Author: Okay, so I apparently didn't have a doc issue to do this, but I do now - https://github.com/grafana/tempo/issues/3848
